Dive Into HTML5 by Mark Pilgrim

2011-03-18

Chapter 9:  A Form of Madness

HTML5 defines a dozen new input types

All of these new input types degrade gracefully in every browser.  Even IE6.

Placeholder Text
  Chrome, Safari, and Andriod OK
  Firefox NG

Autofocus
  Chrome, Safari OK
  Android does autofocus, but you don't really get enough visual feedback that this is what occurred
  Firefox NG
  The fallback logic is interesting

Email
  Chrome, Safari, Firefox, Android OK, but nothing special.  Just a text field
  
URL
  Chrome, Safari, Firefox, Android OK, but nothing special.  Just a text field

Number
  Chrome, Safari present a spinner and do the step logic, but you can enter, by keyboard, a number that violates the range
  Android presents no spinner, but give a numeric virtual keyboard upon selection
  Firefox NG
  Javascript has gotten into the act with input.stepUp, stepDown, and valueAsNumber

Range
  Chrome, Safari present a slider and do the step logic, I suspect a value outside the range is legit
  Android DOES NOTHING...NO CONTROL AT ALL!
  Firefox NG
  This one pretty clearly breaks the assertion "you can start using this immediately"

Date...DateTime-Local
  Chrome works OK, but not really intuitive or friendly
  Safari has some level of support, but it sucks.  I keep getting back to 1582!
  Android NG
  Firefox NG

Search
  Chrome and Safari render it uniquely
  Anroid and Firefox don't render it unqiquely
  
Color
  Chrome, Safari, Firefox, Android NG
  
Form Validation
  HTML5 can never replace server-side validation

  Email validation is unbelievably complicated.

  Only Opera appears to be doing any of this today.  Firefox 4 will get some, but its not released, is it?
  Lovely "Safari and Chrome have shipped an incomplete implementation that may trip you up: they validate form controls, but they don't offer any visible feedback when a form field fails validation. In other words, if you enter an invalid (or improperly formatted) date in a type="date" field, Safari and Chrome will not submit the form, but they won't tell you why they didn't submit the form."

Required Fields
  None of Firefox 3.6, Safari, or Chrome seem to do "required".
  

